# University of California – Policy
# Anti-Discrimination

**Antidiscriminacion**  
**Laban sa Diskriminasyon**  
**反歧視**

**Contact:** Catherine Spear  
**Title:** Executive Director, Systemwide Office of Civil Rights  
**Email:** SystemwideOfficeofCivilRights@ucop.edu  
**Phone:** (510) 987-9701

## TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. POLICY SUMMARY  
II. DEFINITIONS  
III. POLICY TEXT  
IV. COMPLIANCE / RESPONSIBILITIES  
V. PROCEDURES  
VI. RELATED INFORMATION  
VII. FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS  
VIII. REVISION HISTORY  
IX. APPENDICES  

**Responsible Officer:** Executive Director of the Systemwide Office of Civil Rights  
**Responsible Office:** Systemwide Office of Civil Rights  
**Issuance Date:** 8/29/2024  
**Effective Date:** 8/29/2024  

**Scope:** This Anti-Discrimination Policy ("Policy") applies to all University of California ("University") employees as well as undergraduate, graduate, and professional students ("students"), and third parties. The Policy applies at all University campuses, the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Medical Centers, the Office of the President, Agriculture and Natural Resources, and to all University programs and activities.

## I. POLICY SUMMARY

The University of California ("University") is committed to maintaining a community dedicated to the advancement, application and transmission of knowledge and creative endeavors through academic excellence, where all people who participate in University programs and activities can work and learn together in an atmosphere free of discrimination, harassment, and retaliation.

This Policy addresses the University's responsibilities and procedures related to Discrimination, Harassment, and Retaliation, as defined in this Policy (together, "Prohibited Conduct") in order to ensure equitable and inclusive education and employment environments. This Policy will be implemented in a manner that recognizes rights to freedom of speech and expression. However, freedom of speech and academic freedom are not limitless and, for example, do not protect speech or expressive conduct that violates federal and state anti-discrimination laws.

This Policy defines Prohibited Conduct and explains the administrative procedures the University uses to resolve reports of such conduct. The University will respond promptly and equitably to reports of Prohibited Conduct. This includes action to stop, prevent, correct, or discipline behavior that violates this Policy.

## II. DEFINITIONS

### A. Prohibited Conduct

1. **Harassment:** Unwelcome conduct based on an individual's actual or perceived Protected Category (See Section II.B.5) that is sufficiently severe, persistent, or pervasive that it unreasonably interferes with, denies, or adversely limits an individual's participation in or benefit from the education, employment, or other programs or activities of the University, and creates an environment that a reasonable person would find to be intimidating or offensive.

   In evaluating whether conduct is harassment, the Local Implementation Officer will consider the totality of the circumstances, including but not limited to:
   
   - The frequency, nature, and severity of the conduct;
   - Whether the conduct was physically threatening;
   - Whether the conduct arose in the context of other discriminatory conduct or other misconduct;
   - The effect of the conduct;
   - Whether the conduct would be objectively viewed as intimidating or offensive by a reasonable person; and
   - Whether the conduct may be protected by academic freedom or freedom of speech. When the investigation implicates academic freedom, the Local Implementation Officer will, based on locally developed procedures, consult with the appropriate academic officer for relevant academic expertise.
   
   This Policy addresses Harassment that is not covered under the University's Policy on Sexual Violence and Sexual Harassment.

2. **Discrimination:** An Unfavorable Action taken because of an individual's actual or perceived Protected Category.

   a. **Unfavorable Action:** Adverse or unequal treatment under University authority that unreasonably denies, unreasonably limits, or materially interferes with an individual's ability to participate in programs, activities, or employment of the University, and/or receive services, benefits, or aid of the University, unless required or authorized by law.
   
   An Unfavorable Action is taken because of an individual's Protected Category. An Unfavorable Action will not exist where the action or inaction would have been taken regardless of the individual's Protected Category.
   
   Applying for or accepting research awards that contain eligibility restrictions that are permitted by state and federal law and that are required as a condition for funding does not constitute Prohibited Conduct under this Policy.
   
   b. **Failure to Accommodate:** Failure of the University to provide reasonable accommodations to individuals when required by law.
   
   For specific information about the provision of accommodations and the interactive process, please refer to other applicable policies, including but not limited to, the Guidelines Applying to Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Disability (PACAOS 140), Personnel Policies for Staff Members 81 (Reasonable Accommodation), and Academic Personnel Manual – 711 (Reasonable Accommodation for Academic Appointees with Disabilities)
   
   Note: Disparate Impact occurs when there is sufficient evidence that a University policy or practice, although neutral on its face, results in an adverse and material disproportionate impact on individuals within a particular Protected Category, unless the policy or practice has a substantial legitimate justification. The investigative process in this Policy is inapplicable to Disparate Impact concerns. Allegations of Disparate Impact raised by individuals allegedly adversely impacted by the policy or practice will be reviewed and addressed, as appropriate, by the Local Implementation Officer.

3. **Retaliation:** An adverse action against an individual based on:

   a. their report or other disclosure of alleged Discrimination and/or Harassment to a University employee or
   
   b. their participation in, or assistance with, the investigative process, reporting, remedial, or corrective action/disciplinary processes provided for in this Policy.
   
   An adverse action is conduct that would discourage a reasonable person from reporting Discrimination and/or Harassment or participating in a process provided for in this Policy, such as threats, intimidation, coercion, reprisals and adverse employment or educational actions. Good faith actions lawfully pursued in response to a report of Discrimination and/or Harassment (such as gathering evidence) are not, without more, Retaliation.

### B. Other Definitions:

1. **Complainant:** An individual alleged, in a report to the Local Implementation Officer, to have experienced Prohibited Conduct.

2. **Confidential Resources:** The following employees who receive information about Prohibited Conduct in their confidential capacity are Confidential Resources:
   
   a. Ombuds Office,
   
   b. Licensed counselors in student counseling centers and in employee assistance programs,
   
   c. Any individuals with a professional license requiring confidentiality (including health center employees but excluding campus legal counsel), or someone who is supervised by such an individual, and
   
   d. Pastoral counselors (individuals associated with a religious order or denomination, who are recognized by that religious order or denomination as someone who provides confidential counseling).
   
   Designation as a "Confidential Resource" under this Policy only exempts an individual from reporting to the Local Implementation Officer. It does not affect other mandatory reporting obligations under other policies or laws that require reporting to campus or local law enforcement, or Child Protective Services.

3. **Location:** Any University campus, the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Medical Centers, the Office of the President, and Agriculture and Natural Resources.

4. **Preponderance of Evidence:** A standard of proof that requires that a fact be found when its occurrence, based on evidence, is more likely than not.

5. **Protected Category:** An identity protected by federal or state law, including the following: race, religion, color, citizenship, national or ethnic origin, ancestry, sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, lactation or related medical conditions), gender, gender identity, gender expression, gender transition, sexual orientation, physical or mental disability (including having a history of a disability or being regarded as being disabled), medical condition (cancer-related or genetic characteristics), predisposing genetic information (including family medical history), marital status, age (at least 40 years of age in employment context), or veteran or military status. The Protected Category definitions apply for the purposes of this Policy only.

6. **Respondent:** An individual who is alleged to have engaged in Prohibited Conduct and/or who has been reported to have violated this Policy.

7. **Responsible Employee:** Any of the following who is not a Confidential Resource:
   
   - Campus Police
   - Human Resources Administrators, Academic Personnel Administrators, and Discrimination and Title IX Professionals
   - Managers and Supervisors including Deans, Department Chairs, and Directors of Organized Research Units
   - Faculty Members
   
   If a Responsible Employee learns, in the course of employment, that any individual affiliated with the University may have experienced Prohibited Conduct, as defined in this Policy, the Responsible Employee must promptly notify the Local Implementation Officer or designee.

8. **Supportive and Remedial Measures**

   a. **Supportive Measures** include both Interim Measures and Mitigating Measures. The University provides Supportive Measures as appropriate and reasonably available, without fee or charge.
   
   i. **Interim Measures:** Services, accommodations, or other measures put in place temporarily after the Local Implementation Officer receives a report of Prohibited Conduct to assist or protect the Complainant, the Respondent, or the University community; restore or preserve a party's access to a University program or activity; or deter Prohibited Conduct. Interim Measures may:
      
      - remain in place until the final outcome of a Resolution Process (see Section V.A.5) or a subsequent disciplinary or appeal process;
      - change or terminate depending on the parties' evolving needs, as assessed by the Local Implementation Officer; or
      - become permanent as part of the resolution of a report.
   
   ii. **Mitigating Measures:** Services, accommodations, or other measures for a Complainant who is not in a Resolution Process (see Section V.A.5), including a Complainant who was previously in a Resolution Process that did not result in a finding of a policy violation. Mitigating Measures may be implemented to provide support, restore or preserve access to a University program or activity, or deter Prohibited Conduct.
   
   b. **Remedial Measures:** Services, accommodations, or other measures put in place as a result of a completed Resolution Process (see Section V.A.5).

9. **University Community Members:** any members of the University community, including faculty and other academic appointees, staff, student employees, students, coaches, clinicians, residents, interns, and third parties (such as contractors, volunteers, vendors, visitors, guests, and patients).

## III. POLICY TEXT

### A. General

Discrimination and Harassment pose a serious threat to the University's mission, values, and reputation. As such, the University is committed to creating and maintaining a community where all individuals can work and learn together in an inclusive environment. Prohibited Conduct violates this Policy and may violate the law.

Any individual can report conduct that may be Prohibited Conduct. The University will respond promptly and equitably to such reports. This includes appropriate action to stop, prevent, and remedy the Prohibited Conduct and, when appropriate, to impose corrective action/disciplinary measures on the Respondent.

This Policy addresses Prohibited Conduct that is not covered under the University's Policy on Sexual Violence and Sexual Harassment (SVSH). Local SVSH resource information can be found at Sexual Violence Prevention and Response.

This Policy is intended to be consistent with applicable state and federal laws and University policies.

### B. Policy Coverage

This Policy covers acts of Prohibited Conduct committed by University students (as defined in Section 14.00 of the Policies Applying to Campus Activities, Organizations, and Students, including applicants who become students and former students as described in Section 101.00 of the Policy on Student Conduct and Discipline); employees; and third parties (such as contractors, volunteers, vendors, visitors, guests, and patients), and acts of Prohibited Conduct committed against students, employees, and third parties, when the conduct occurs:

1. on University property; or
2. in connection with University employment (including, for example, remote-work environments); or
3. in the context of a University program or activity (including, for example, University-sponsored study abroad, research, online courses, health services, or internship programs).

Consistent with Section 101.00 of the Policy on Student Conduct and Discipline, and as specified in implementing campus regulations, this Policy may cover Prohibited Conduct by students that occurs off campus.

Not every report of Prohibited Conduct will result in a Resolution Process in accordance with Section V.A.5, even if it is covered by this Policy. Rather, the Local Implementation Officer will close some reports after making an initial assessment (see Section V.A.4).

### C. Conduct that Violates this Policy

This Policy prohibits Prohibited Conduct as defined in Section II.A. Individuals may engage in Prohibited Conduct in person or through other means. This includes, but is not limited to, conduct involving physical actions and/or any form of communication, including, but not limited to, spoken, written, and non-verbal communication through any means including, but not limited to, electronic media, such as the internet, social networks, cell phones, texts, and other devices or forms of contact.

In addition, Prohibited Conduct may occur between individuals with the same Protected Category identity or different Protected Category identities.

### D. Protection of Complainants, Respondents, and Witnesses

1. The University prohibits Retaliation against someone for reporting possible Discrimination and/or Harassment or participating in a process under this Policy (See Section II.A.3).

2. The University must balance the privacy interests of individuals involved in a report of Prohibited Conduct against the need to gather information, ensure a fair process, and stop, prevent and remedy Prohibited Conduct. In this context, the University tries to protect an individual's privacy to the extent permitted by law and University policies. The University otherwise keeps confidential the identities of parties, witnesses and those who report Prohibited Conduct, except as required by law or permitted by the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) and protects the privacy of personally identifiable information pursuant to all applicable state and federal privacy laws, and University policies.

### E. Free Speech and Academic Freedom

The faculty and other academic appointees, staff, and students of the University enjoy significant free speech protections guaranteed by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution and Article I, Section II of the California Constitution. This Policy is intended to protect members of the University community from Discrimination, Harassment, and Retaliation, not to regulate protected speech. This Policy will be implemented in a manner that recognizes rights to freedom of speech and expression.

The University also has a compelling interest in free inquiry and the collective search for knowledge; it thus recognizes principles of academic freedom as a special area of protected speech. Consistent with these principles, no provision of this Policy will be interpreted to prohibit conduct that is legitimately related to course content, teaching methods, scholarship, or the public commentary of an individual faculty member, other academic appointee, or the educational, political, artistic, or literary expression of students in classrooms and public forums. Academic freedom, as described in Academic Personnel Manual - 010 (Academic Freedom), APM - 011 (Academic Freedom, Protection of Professional Standards, and Responsibilities of Non-Faculty Academic Appointees), and APM - 015 (The Faculty Code of Conduct), includes the right to express views, even in passionate terms, on matters of public importance. This right extends to curriculum and instruction within the classroom, which includes discussions, perspectives, information, and challenges to conventional beliefs.

Freedom of speech, freedom of expression, and academic freedom are essential to the mission of the University; the free exchange of ideas is necessary for the discovery and dissemination of knowledge. However, freedom of speech and academic freedom are not limitless and, for example, do not protect speech or expressive conduct that violates federal or state anti-discrimination laws.

### F. Confidential Resources

Individuals who have experienced Prohibited Conduct may speak confidentially with a Confidential Resource (see Section II.B.2). Confidential Resources are not Responsible Employees and need not report information they receive while acting in their confidential capacity to the Local Implementation Officer.

Disclosures to Confidential Resources while they are acting in their confidential capacity are not "reports" under this Policy and will not, alone, result in any formal University action. Confidential Resources may inform an individual who discloses experiencing possible Prohibited Conduct of the discloser's right to report directly to the Local Implementation Officer.

## IV. COMPLIANCE / RESPONSIBILITIES

### A. Implementation of the Policy

Executive Officers (the University President, Chancellor, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Director, or Vice President of Agriculture and Natural Resources or Executive Vice President of UC Health) can develop supplementary information to support implementation of this Policy. The Executive Director of the Systemwide Office of Civil Rights will interpret this Policy consistently and in a way that does not substantively change the Policy.

The Executive Officer at each Location must establish and implement local procedures consistent with this Policy. Exceptions to local implementation procedures required by the Policy must be approved by the Executive Officer or designee.

### B. Revisions to the Policy

The President approves this Policy and any revisions. The Executive Director of the Systemwide Office of Civil Rights may recommend revisions to the Policy consistent with approval authorities and applicable Bylaws, Standing Orders, and Policies of The Regents. The Executive Director of the Systemwide Office of Civil Rights will ensure that the Policy is reviewed regularly and updated in a manner that is consistent with other University policies.

### C. Approval of Actions

Actions within the Policy must be approved according to local procedures. Actions related to Senior Management Group employees must be approved by the President.

### D. Compliance with the Policy

The Executive Officer at each Location will designate the local management office that is responsible for monitoring, enforcing, and reporting policy compliance. The Senior Vice President – Chief Compliance and Audit Officer will periodically audit and monitor compliance with the Policy.

### E. Additional Enforcement Information

The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP), and the California Civil Rights Department (CRD) investigate reports of unlawful discrimination and harassment in employment. The U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights (DOE-OCR) investigates complaints of discrimination and harassment of students and employees in University programs or activities. The U.S. Department of Health & Human Services Office for Civil Rights (HHS-OCR) investigates complaints of discrimination and harassment occurring in the context of clinical, health, research, education, and employment programs. These agencies may serve as fact finders and attempt to facilitate the voluntary resolution of disputes. For more information, contact the nearest EEOC, OFCCP, CRD, DOE-OCR or HHS-OCR offices.

### F. Noncompliance with the Policy

Noncompliance with this Policy may result in remediation, educational efforts, informal counseling, adverse performance evaluations, corrective action/discipline, and termination/dismissal.

For students, consequences of engaging in Prohibited Conduct are governed by the Policy on Student Conduct and Discipline (PACAOS 100).

For policy-covered staff employees, corrective action/discipline is governed by Personnel Policies for Staff Members 62 (Corrective Action), 63 (Investigatory Leave), and 64 (Termination and Job Abandonment); Personnel Policies for Staff Members II-64 (Termination of Appointment), which applies to Senior Management Group (SMG) employees; and as applicable, other policies and procedures.

For academic personnel, formal corrective action/discipline is governed by Academic Personnel Manual - 015 (The Faculty Code of Conduct) and APM - 016 (University Policy on Faculty Conduct and the Administration of Discipline); APM - 150 (Non-Senate Academic Appointees/Corrective Action and Dismissal) and, as applicable, other policies and procedures. This Policy does not supplant disciplinary processes described in the APM or in the Academic Senate's Bylaws or regulations.

For represented employees, formal corrective action/discipline is governed by collective bargaining agreements.

## V. PROCEDURES

### A. Procedures for Reporting and Responding to Reports of Prohibited Conduct

This section provides an overview of the procedures the University uses to respond to reports of Prohibited Conduct. While the Local Implementation Officer has responsibility for oversight of the reporting and response processes, other offices at each Location will be involved and consulted as necessary. The specific procedures for investigating and resolving complaints of Prohibited Conduct depend on the Respondent's affiliation with the University. The Complainant and the Respondent are sometimes referred to together in this section as "the parties."

1. **Reporting**

   Any individual can report Prohibited Conduct. Reports can be made anonymously. Individuals may make a report to the Local Implementation Officer, any Responsible Employee, or another appropriate office such as the Academic Personnel Office, Student Affairs, Office of the Provost, or Human Resources Office. The individual or office that receives the report must forward it to the Local Implementation Officer. If the Responsible Employee to whom a report normally would be made is the Respondent, reports may be made to another Responsible Employee or office. Upon receipt of a report of Prohibited Conduct from a Responsible Employee, the Local Implementation Officer will attempt to contact the Complainant, if known, to inform them of their rights, options, and resources.

2. **Timelines for Making Reports**

   There is no time limit for reporting. Individuals should report incidents even if significant time has passed. However, the sooner the University receives a report, the better able it will be to respond, investigate, remedy, and impose corrective action/discipline if appropriate.

3. **Initial Assessment of a Report / Immediate Health and Safety**

   As soon as practicable after receiving a report, the Local Implementation Officer will make an initial assessment, including a limited factual inquiry when appropriate, to determine how to proceed.
   
   The Local Implementation Officer will next determine:
   
   - whether the report on its face alleges an act of Prohibited Conduct as defined in Section II.A; and
   - if so, whether the alleged Prohibited Conduct is covered by this Policy, as described in Section III.
   
   The Local Implementation Officer may consult with other offices as necessary. This may include Academic Personnel Offices for complaints involving faculty and other academic appointees, Student Affairs Offices for complaints involving students, Human Resources or Employee and Labor Relations Offices for complaints involving staff and health professionals or complaints stemming from a clinical encounter.
   
   The Local Implementation Officer will:
   
   - make an immediate assessment of the health and safety of the Complainant in consultation with the Complainant when possible,
   - make an immediate assessment of the health and safety of the campus community,
   - determine and oversee Supportive Measures that are deemed necessary upon initial assessment, and
   - engage in outreach to the Complainant that includes, for example, an explanation of rights and reporting options, a request to meet with the Local Implementation Office, and available campus and community resources.
   
   The Local Implementation Officer will also inform the Complainant of the range of possible outcomes of the report, including Supportive and Remedial Measures and corrective/disciplinary actions, and the procedures leading to such outcomes.

4. **Closure After Initial Assessment**

   Not all reports that the Local Implementation Officer receives are reports of Prohibited Conduct that can be resolved through a Resolution Process as described below. This includes reports for which the Local Implementation Officer determines that:
   
   - even if true, the alleged conduct is not Prohibited Conduct (see Section II.A and Section III.C, as limited by Section III.E); or
   - the alleged conduct is not covered by this Policy (see Section III.B); or
   - there is not enough information to carry out a Resolution Process (for example, the identities of the people involved are unknown); or
   - a Complainant's request that no Formal Investigation occur can be honored (see Section V.A.5.b); or
   - there is not enough nexus between the alleged conduct and the University to carry out a Resolution Process (for example, the conduct did not occur in the context of a University program or activity and involved only third parties).
   
   The Local Implementation Officer will close such matters pursuant to written guidelines issued by the Systemwide Office of Civil Rights. When appropriate, the Local Implementation Officer will take steps to stop the reported conduct, prevent its escalation or recurrence, and address its effects. Such steps may include, but are not limited to, offering resources, providing Mitigating Measures to the Complainant, providing targeted preventive education (including to the Respondent), and training programs.
   
   When the reported conduct is not Prohibited Conduct under this Policy but may be conduct prohibited by or addressed by other University policy or policies, the Local Implementation Officer will, if appropriate, refer the matter to another office for review and resolution.
   
   To determine whether there is enough nexus between the alleged conduct and the University to carry out a Resolution Process, the Local Implementation Officer will consider factors such as:
   
   - whether there is a connection between the alleged Prohibited Conduct and University property, University employment, or a University program or activity;
   - whether the Complainant or Respondent were University Community Members when the Prohibited Conduct allegedly occurred;
   - whether the Complainant or Respondent were University Community Members at the time of the report; and
   - whether there is information indicating an ongoing threat to the University community.

5. **Overview of Resolution Processes**

   Reports of Prohibited Conduct that are not closed after the Local Implementation Officer's initial assessment may be addressed through Alternative Resolution, Formal Investigation, a separate employee grievance or complaint process, or Other Inquiry. Each of these is described below. Resolution Processes are non-adversarial proceedings. At the beginning of any Resolution Process, the Local Implementation Officer will inform the parties of the University's rules of conduct during the process.

   a. **Alternative Resolution**
   
      Alternative Resolution is not available when the Complainant is a student and the Respondent is an employee. In other cases, after an initial assessment of the alleged facts, the Local Implementation Officer may—if the Complainant and Respondent agree in writing—begin an Alternative Resolution process (which may incorporate restorative principles and practices). The Local Implementation Officer will, if appropriate, begin the process in consultation with other offices depending on whether the Complainant and Respondent are faculty, other academic appointees, staff, student employees, or students. Alternative Resolution may include, among other responses:
      
      - separating the parties;
      - providing for safety;
      - referring the parties to counseling;
      - mediation;
      - referral for corrective action/discipline;
      - an agreement between the parties;
      - conducting targeted preventive educational and training programs; and
      - conducting a follow-up review to ensure that the resolution has been carried out effectively.
      
      Alternative Resolution may be especially useful when:
      
      - an investigation is not likely to lead to a resolution;
      - both parties prefer an informal process; or
      - a case involves less serious allegations.
      
      The Local Implementation Officer has discretion to determine whether the complaint is appropriate for Alternative Resolution; to determine the type of resolution to pursue; and to stop the process at any time before its conclusion and move to a Formal Investigation.
      
      Participation in Alternative Resolution is voluntary, meaning that both the Complainant and the Respondent must agree to participate. If Alternative Resolution is selected, the Local Implementation Officer will provide timely written notice to both parties that includes the allegations and states that:
      
      - the Local Implementation Officer has begun the process;
      - the process is voluntary and will end upon either party's request;
      - termination of the Alternative Resolution process may result in Formal Investigation;
      - the parties may be accompanied by an advisor throughout the process;
      - the Local Implementation Officer will notify both parties of the process's outcome; and
      - the process is private but not confidential; the Local Implementation Officer will maintain a record of the process and may share information with others if needed to carry out the resolution, and information shared by parties may be considered in any subsequent Resolution Process.
      
      The Local Implementation Officer will oversee the Alternative Resolution process and, if other campus officials are involved in the process, maintain an appropriate level of involvement.
      
      Once the parties have agreed to the terms of an Alternative Resolution, the University will not conduct a Formal Investigation unless the Local Implementation Officer determines that the Respondent failed to satisfy the terms of the Alternative Resolution, or that the Alternative Resolution was unsuccessful in stopping the Prohibited Conduct or preventing its recurrence.
      
      The Local Implementation Officer will keep records of all reports and conduct addressed through Alternative Resolution.

   b. **Formal Investigation**
   
      The Local Implementation Officer will begin a Formal Investigation when a decision has been made not to close a report after the initial assessment and either (i) Alternative Resolution and Other Inquiry are not appropriate, or (ii) the parties do not agree to participate in Alternative Resolution or it ends before they agree on terms. The Local Implementation Officer may coordinate the Formal Investigation with other offices, depending on the Complainant's and Respondent's affiliation with the University (i.e., faculty, other academic appointees, staff, or students).
      
      If the Complainant does not want a Formal Investigation, the Local Implementation Officer will give serious consideration to such a request. The Local Implementation Officer may, however, determine that a Formal Investigation is necessary to mitigate a risk to the campus community. If the Local Implementation Officer decides to open a Formal Investigation despite the Complainant's request, the Local Implementation Officer will:
      
      - inform the Complainant of the decision before beginning the Formal Investigation or otherwise notifying the Respondent of the Complainant's identity;
      - inform the Respondent that the Complainant did not request a Formal Investigation, but the Local Implementation Officer determined one was necessary; and
      - provide the Complainant with all information required by this Policy unless the Complainant states in writing that they do not want it.
      
      If the Local Implementation Officer does not begin a Formal Investigation, the Local Implementation Officer will inform the Complainant that this limits possible resolution options. The Local Implementation Officer will nonetheless provide Mitigating Measures as appropriate and consistent with Complainant's privacy and the absence of a Formal Investigation.
      
      At the beginning of a Formal Investigation, the Local Implementation Officer will provide the parties a written summary of the allegations, an explanation of their rights, the procedures that will be followed, available resources, and this Policy. While the parties have the right to identify evidence and witnesses, the University bears the burden of proof and the burden of gathering evidence sufficient to reach a determination regarding responsibility.
      
      i. **Timeframe.** The Local Implementation Officer will complete the Formal Investigation promptly, typically within 60 to 90 business days of notifying the parties in writing of the charges. However, the Local Implementation Officer may extend the timeframe past 90 business days for good cause. The Local Implementation Officer will periodically update parties on the status of the Formal Investigation and notify them in writing of the reason for any extension and the projected new timeline. The actual time required depends on the specific circumstances, including the complexity of the matter and the severity and extent of the alleged conduct. The Local Implementation Officer will consider, approve, and communicate extensions pursuant to written guidelines from the Systemwide Office of Civil Rights.
      
      If the police are also investigating the alleged conduct, the Local Implementation Officer will coordinate with the police but must nonetheless act promptly without delaying the Formal Investigation until the end of the criminal investigation.
      
      ii. **Disclosure of Information.** The Formal Investigation generally includes interviews with the parties and any witnesses, and a review of evidence. The Local Implementation Officer or designee will:
      
      - share information with witnesses only as reasonably necessary to conduct a fair and thorough investigation;
      - counsel witnesses about keeping confidential and private any information that they may learn through the Formal Investigation, to protect both the people involved and the integrity of the Formal Investigation; and
      - inform witnesses that information they provide directly related to the Formal Investigation and their identities will likely be disclosed to the Complainant and Respondent.
      
      iii. **Right to an Advisor.** The Complainant and Respondent may have an advisor present when they are interviewed and at meetings. They may have other support persons present under other policies. In addition, witnesses may have an advisor present at the discretion of the Local Implementation Officer or in accordance with University policy or a collective bargaining agreement.
      
      - The institution may restrict the extent and manner of the advisor's participation in the proceedings as long as restrictions apply equally to Complainants and Respondents.
      
      iv. **Academic Freedom.** When the Formal Investigation implicates academic appropriateness or academic freedom, the Local Implementation Officer will consult with the appropriate academic officer for relevant academic expertise.
      
      v. **University-Initiated Investigation.** The Local Implementation Officer may choose to begin and conduct a Formal Investigation without a Complainant when there is, for example:
      
      - information indicating an ongoing threat to the University community; or
      - a pattern of alleged conduct toward multiple people by the same Respondent that would, in the aggregate, constitute Prohibited Conduct (see Section II.A.) for a reasonable person; or
      - an allegation of Prohibited Conduct covered by this Policy in the public realm (such as reports in the news or social media).
      
      vi. **Administrative Closure.** The Local Implementation Officer may close a Formal Investigation before completing it if they determine that a significant change in circumstances has so substantially impaired the Formal Investigation that the Local Implementation Officer cannot reach reasonably reliable conclusions about whether the alleged conduct occurred. The Local Implementation Officer will, when appropriate, still take steps to stop the reported conduct, prevent its escalation or recurrence, and address its effects, including offering appropriate resources to the parties and Mitigating Measures to the Complainant.

   c. **Grievance/Complaint Procedures for Employees**
   
      Instead of, or in addition to, reporting to the Local Implementation Officer or other Responsible Employee, a University employee may file a grievance or complaint. That grievance or complaint must meet all of the requirements, including time limits for filing, under the applicable complaint resolution or grievance procedure listed in Appendix I: University Complaint Resolution and Grievance Procedures. Any such grievance or complaint that alleges that any individual affiliated with the University may have experienced Prohibited Conduct will be forwarded to the Local Implementation Officer for processing under this Policy, and the grievance or complaint procedure may be held in abeyance pending resolution under this Policy, unless an applicable collective bargaining agreement provides otherwise. After completion of the process under this Policy, the grievance or complaint may be reactivated under the applicable grievance or complaint procedure.

   d. **Other Inquiry**
   
      When a report is not closed after initial assessment, yet is not appropriate for Alternative Resolution nor Formal Investigation because there is no individual identifiable Respondent over whom the Local Implementation Officer has jurisdiction, the Local Implementation Officer may:
      
      - conduct an inquiry to try to determine what occurred and
      - take prompt steps reasonably calculated to stop any substantiated conduct, prevent its recurrence, and, as appropriate, remedy its effects.
      
      Such an inquiry may be appropriate when, for example, the Complainant alleges Prohibited Conduct by an organization, an individual whose identity is unknown, or a third party, or alleges conduct by multiple people that rises to the level of Prohibited Conduct only when considered in the aggregate.
      
      The extent of the inquiry and responsive steps will depend on the specific circumstances. This includes, for example:
      
      - the nature and location of the alleged conduct,
      - the University's relationship to the Complainant, and
      - the University's relationship to and level of control over the organization or individual alleged to have engaged in the conduct.
      
      The Local Implementation Officer will complete the inquiry promptly and notify the Complainant of the outcome.

   e. **Notifications and Documentation**
   
      When engaging in a Resolution Process provided for in this Section V.A.5., the Local Implementation Officer will provide written notices to the parties and keep records.

6. **Formal Investigation Report and Outcome**

   If a Formal Investigation is conducted, the Local Implementation Officer will prepare a written report that includes:
   
   - the factual allegations and alleged Policy violations;
   - statements of the parties;
   - a summary of the evidence;
   - credibility determinations when appropriate;
   - findings of fact; and
   - an analysis and determination of whether this Policy was violated.
   
   In determining whether this Policy was violated, the Local Implementation Officer will apply the Preponderance of Evidence standard.
   
   At the end of the Formal Investigation, the Local Implementation Officer will simultaneously provide the parties the Formal Investigation report. The report may be redacted to protect privacy (see APM - 160 and other University policies governing privacy). The Local Implementation Officer will also inform the parties in writing of the outcome of the Formal Investigation and its rationale, and of any available next steps.

7. **Remedy**

   a. If the University finds Prohibited Conduct, the University will take prompt and effective steps reasonably calculated to stop the violation, prevent its recurrence, and, as appropriate, remedy its effects. For examples of available Remedial Measures, see Appendix II.
   
   b. If the remedy has not already been provided, the Local Implementation Officer will oversee its implementation in consultation with appropriate administrators. The Local Implementation Officer will also consider whether any systemic remedies are appropriate.

8. **Corrective Action/Discipline**

   a. The Local Implementation Officer will forward the Formal Investigation Report (with attachments) to the appropriate administrator responsible for possible further action, including corrective action/discipline.
   
   b. Any member of the University community who is found to have engaged in Prohibited Conduct may be subject to corrective/disciplinary action, up to and including termination/dismissal pursuant to the applicable University disciplinary procedure or other policy.
   
   c. At the end of any corrective/disciplinary procedure the Complainant and the Respondent will be informed, in writing, of:
   
   - the outcome, including the final determination regarding the alleged offense, if there was any appropriate action taken, and the rationale for the results;
   - any available next steps; and
   - any subsequent change to the results and when results become final.
   
   The University tries to finalize and notify parties of corrective action/disciplinary decisions reasonably promptly pursuant to applicable procedures, depending on the severity and extent of the Prohibited Conduct and the complexity of the matter.

### B. Location Responsibilities

Each Location must do the following:

1. Designate and provide adequate resources and independence to a Local Implementation Officer. The responsibilities of the Local Implementation Officer include, but may not be limited to, the following duties:

   a. Coordinate compliance with this policy, including investigations, reports, and remedies.
   
   b. Coordinate with other responsible units to ensure that Supportive and Remedial Measures determined necessary by the Local Implementation Officer are provided.
   
   c. Provide educational materials to promote compliance with the Policy and familiarity with local reporting procedures.
   
   d. Respond promptly and equitably to reports of Prohibited Conduct according to the Policy.

2. Designate individuals who can offer confidential consultations, without reporting the incident to the Local Implementation Officer, to any member of the University community seeking information or advice about making a report of Prohibited Conduct. Each Location will post information about how and where to contact Confidential Resources on its website.

3. Individuals who consult with such Confidential Resources will be advised that their discussions in these settings are not considered actual reports of Prohibited Conduct and that without additional action by the individual, these discussions will not, alone, result in any formal action by the University to resolve their concerns.

4. Follow University established and approved processes for investigation, adjudication, and corrective action/discipline.

5. Publicize a Location-specific process for reporting incidents of Prohibited Conduct.

## VI. RELATED INFORMATION

A. University of California Standards of Ethical Conduct
B. University of California Statement of Ethical Values
C. Local Implementation Officers

**Academic Personnel Manual**
A. APM - 010 (Academic Freedom)
B. APM - 011 (Academic Freedom, Protection of Professional Standards, and Responsibilities of Non-Faculty Academic Appointees)
C. APM - 015 (The Faculty Code of Conduct)
D. APM - 016 (University Policy on Faculty Conduct and the Administration of Discipline)
E. APM - 035 (Affirmative Action and Nondiscrimination in Employment)
F. APM - 140 (Non-Senate Academic Appointees/Grievances)
G. APM - 150 (Non-Senate Academic Appointees/Corrective Action and Dismissal)
H. APM - 160 (Academic Personnel Records/Maintenance of, Access to, and Opportunity to Request Amendment of)
I. APM - 711 (Reasonable Accommodation for Academic Appointees with Disabilities)

**Bylaws of the Academic Senate**
A. Senate Bylaw 335
B. Senate Bylaw 336

**Presidential Policies and Guidelines**
A. PPSM-62 (Corrective Action)
B. PPSM-63 (Investigatory Leave)
C. PPSM-64 (Termination and Job Abandonment)
D. PPSM II-64 (Termination of Appointment)
E. PPSM-70 (Complaint Resolution Staff Personnel)
F. PPSM II-70 (Complaint Resolution Senior Managers)
G. PPSM-81 (Reasonable Accommodation)
H. University of California Sexual Violence and Sexual Harassment
I. University of California Abusive Conduct in the Workplace
J. PACAOS (Policies Applying to Campus Activities, Organizations, and Students)
K. PACAOS 100 (Policy on Student Conduct and Discipline)
L. PACAOS 140 (Guidelines Applying to Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Disability)
M. PACAOS 150 (Student-Related Policy Applying to Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Sex)
N. PACAOS Appendix C (Nondiscrimination Policy Statement for University of California Publications Regarding Student-Related Matters)
O. Business and Finance Bulletin RMP-2: Records Retention and Disposition: Principles, Processes, and Guidelines

**Federal and State Statutes**
A. Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (81 Stat. 602, as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq.)
B. Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. § 12101, et seq., as amended, 2008)
C. Fair Employment and Housing Act (Gov't Code § 12900 et seq.)
D. Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (42 U.S.C. § 2000ff et seq.)
E. Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978 (Section 703(a), 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(a))
F. Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. § 794 et seq.)
G. Title VI of the Civil Rights Act: Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. § 2000d et seq.)
H. Title VII of the Civil Rights Act: Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.)
I. Title IX of the Education Amendments Act of 1972 (20 U.S.C. § 1681)
J. Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (38 U.S.C. § 4301 et seq.)

## VII. FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS

1. **What are "associational" Discrimination and Harassment and are they covered by this Policy?**

   Associational Discrimination or Harassment are based on a Complainant's association or relationship with an individual or individuals who are, or who are perceived to be, within a Protected Category. Associational Discrimination and Harassment are covered by this Policy.

2. **Is Prohibited Conduct based on "caste" covered by this Policy?**

   Yes. The University interprets its protection against Prohibited Conduct on the basis of "ancestry" to include protection against Discrimination and Harassment on the basis of an individual's caste. The University interprets the term "caste" to mean an individual's perceived position in a system of social stratification on the basis of inherited status. Caste may be characterized by factors that may include, but are not limited to, inability or restricted ability to alter inherited status; socially enforced restrictions on marriage, private and public segregation, and discrimination; and social exclusion on the basis of perceived status.

3. **What are examples of Prohibited Conduct based on national or ethnic origin or ancestry under this Policy?**

   Prohibited Conduct under the Policy based on national or ethnic origin or ancestry extends to individuals who experience Discrimination or Harassment based on their actual or perceived shared ancestry or ethnic characteristics, or citizenship or residency in a country with a dominant religion or distinct religious identity. This includes, for example, antisemitic, anti-Arab, and Islamophobic Discrimination or Harassment. Some of these forms of Discrimination or Harassment may also represent Prohibited Conduct based on other Protected Categories covered by this Policy, including based on religion.
   
   Examples of such Discrimination or Harassment may include:
   
   - A professor bars Jewish students from a seminar on the Middle East based on the belief that their ties to Israel will polarize class discussions.
   - A student repeatedly refers to a Palestinian-American student as a "terrorist," removes and destroys the student's keffiyeh, and threatens the student with physical harm if he attends campus events.
   - An employee repeatedly tells a fellow Asian-American employee to "go back to China," follows the employee to her vehicle after work, and physically intimidates her, leaving her fearful to go to work.
   - A faculty member declines to hire a Mexican-American graduate student as a research assistant because the faculty member says the student "belongs in Mexico, not in California."
   - Denying access to or participation in any University program or activity based on how an individual looks or dresses (e.g., use of religious or ethnic attire such as a hijab, burka, turban, or kippah).

4. **What constitutes Discrimination on the basis of disability covered under this Policy?**

   Discrimination on the basis of disability can occur in a variety of forms of different treatment or denial of equitable opportunity. For example, individuals might experience a barrier to access a University program or activity because of inaccessible "brick and mortar" facilities, online web content, or other digital content, such as mobile applications. Individuals may not have an equal opportunity or access to participate in an academic program without appropriate academic adjustments or auxiliary aids and services and/or reasonable modifications in policy, practice, or procedure; or in the workplace without reasonable accommodations. Also, individuals may experience disability-based Harassment or an Unfavorable Action based on disability as defined in the Policy. Individuals alleging any of these types of Discrimination or Harassment on the basis of disability may choose to bring a complaint under the Policy.

5. **How does this Policy interact with other existing policies and procedures related to disability discrimination?**

   Individuals may choose to file a complaint under this Policy for Discrimination or Harassment on the basis of disability with their Local Implementation Officer, or they may choose to proceed according to other existing campus/location procedures related to informal resolution, reporting, or appeals the location makes available. The University encourages individuals to engage in early resolution processes campuses make available to resolve specific concerns regarding disability-related claims as they may provide for a timely resolution of the concern(s). For specific information about other policies and procedures related to discrimination on the basis of disability, please refer to the Guidelines Applying to Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Disability (PACAOS 140), Personnel Policies for Staff Members 81 (Reasonable Accommodation), and Academic Personnel Manual - 711 (Reasonable Accommodation for Academic Appointees with Disabilities), as well as local campus resources. Employees may also contact their campus Disability Management office and students may contact their campus Students with Disabilities Services office, and individuals may also contact their campus ADA Coordinator for additional information.

6. **Can I make an anonymous report under this Policy?**

   The Anti-Discrimination Policy allows for anonymous reporting by any person (whether or not the Complainant) unless you are a Responsible Employee. However, it is important to note that if you make a report anonymously the University may be limited in its ability to respond, meet your desired resolution, and/or keep you updated on the status of the complaint. Although a report is received anonymously, the University may have to move forward to address the concern and the Respondent may discern the reporter's identity due to the nature of the complaint. Depending on the information reported, the University may be limited in its response. For example, the University may be limited to respond if the name/identifying information about the accused is not provided.

7. **I am a Responsible Employee. How do I fulfill my obligation?**

   When an individual discloses a possible incident of Prohibited Conduct, you should inform the individual that you are a Responsible Employee who must report any information the individual shared with you to the Local Implementation Officer. As a Responsible Employee, you must contact your Local Implementation Officer as soon as possible and share whatever information you have, including the names of any individuals involved, their contact information, and any details of the incident. As a Responsible Employee, you should report to the Local Implementation Officer even if you are unsure that the incident actually occurred or whether it constitutes Prohibited Conduct. If your job responsibilities ordinarily would require you to investigate a report of disruptive behavior or intervene or resolve the issue, consult with counsel before taking any steps to assure compliance with all applicable laws and policies. If your job responsibilities ordinarily require you to address concerns regarding disability discrimination, including issues with reasonable accommodations/modifications, consult with your Local Implementation Officer about responsible employee reporting obligations and expectations.

8. **How should the University proceed when campus or local law enforcement agencies ("police") are conducting a criminal investigation while the University is conducting a parallel Resolution Process?**

   If the Respondent's alleged conduct is also the subject of a criminal investigation, the Local Implementation Officer will coordinate its Resolution Process with the police. The fact-finding portion of an investigation may be delayed temporarily during the evidence-gathering stage of the criminal investigation. During this delay, the University may put Interim Measures in place. The length of time for evidence gathering by criminal investigators will vary depending on the specific circumstances of each case.

9. **Who can be considered an advisor as described in this Policy?**

   An advisor may be any person, except another party or potential witness, who provides the Complainant or Respondent with guidance or advice (including attorneys). The University may restrict the extent and manner of the advisor's participation in the proceedings as long as the restrictions apply equally to Complainants and Respondents. At the beginning of any Resolution Process, the Local Implementation Officer will inform parties of the University's rules of conduct during the process, and potential consequences if an advisor does not meet those standards, including disqualification from further services as the advisor.

10. **Once the outcome of an investigation or disciplinary proceeding under this Policy is disclosed to the parties, can they be asked to keep this information confidential?**

    The Complainant and Respondent can be advised of the private and sensitive nature of the allegations, personnel and student discipline, and other matters that arise under this Policy but should not be restricted from discussing the allegations or gathering evidence (provided their conduct is not Retaliation as defined in Section II.A.3.), or from further disclosing information about outcomes.

11. **I am covered by a collective bargaining agreement. Does this Policy apply to me?**

    Yes. However, please note that consequences of non-compliance with this Policy, and relevant complaint resolution, grievance and disciplinary procedures, for employees who are covered by a collective bargaining agreement with an exclusive bargaining agent are governed by the appropriate collective bargaining agreement.

12. **Does this Policy's prohibition on sex discrimination include Discrimination on the basis of sex stereotypes, sex characteristics, sexual orientation, and gender identity?**

    Yes. This Policy prohibits Discrimination based on sex, gender, gender identity, gender expression, gender transition, and sexual orientation, all of which are Protected Categories under this Policy. These categories include prohibited conduct based on sex characteristics (which term typically refers to physiological sex characteristics based on a person's anatomy, hormones, or chromosomes), trans identities, and those who identify as intersex.

13. **What are some examples of Discrimination based on gender identity covered by this Policy?**

    Discrimination on the basis of one's gender identity in the workplace may include being denied a promotion, pay raise, or training opportunity based on one's gender identity. Discrimination on the basis of gender identity in the educational environment can include exclusion from use of restroom facilities that align with one's gender identity, or requiring transgender students to stay in a single-occupancy room or to disclose personal information that other students are not required to disclose.

14. **What are some examples of Discrimination based on sexual orientation covered by this Policy?**

    Discrimination on the basis of one's sexual orientation in the workplace may include being denied a promotion, pay raise, or training opportunity based on one's sexual orientation.
    
    Discrimination on the basis of one's sexual orientation in the education environment includes situations where a student is denied the same opportunities, benefits, or access to educational programs because of their sexual orientation. For example, a student is denied the opportunity to be a Resident Assistant for a campus residence hall because they self-identify as a lesbian.
    
    If you believe you have been subjected to Discrimination on the basis of gender identity and/or sexual orientation, please contact your Local Implementation Officer. In addition, should you believe you have been harassed on the basis of gender identity and/or sexual orientation (including sex stereotypes and sex characteristics), please contact your Title IX Officer. Please note that at some campuses or locations, the Local Implementation Officer and Title IX Officer may be the same person.

15. **Does this Policy prohibit Discrimination based on pregnancy and pregnancy-related conditions?**

    Yes. This Policy defines Discrimination on the basis of sex to include actual or perceived pregnancy, childbirth, lactation, or related medical conditions, as well as recovery. Discrimination on the basis of sex also includes Discrimination based on termination of pregnancy. For example, a Resident Assistant tells a pregnant student they have to move to a new room on the first floor because of their pregnancy to avoid pre-term labor by climbing stairs to their third-floor dorm room. In addition, failure of an employee to provide a reasonable modification that has been approved by the Title IX Officer or their designee may constitute Discrimination in violation of this Policy. Individuals are encouraged to contact their local Title IX Office with any questions.

16. **Does this Policy prohibit Harassment based on pregnancy or pregnancy-related conditions?**

    Yes. This Policy defines Harassment on the basis of sex to include actual or perceived pregnancy, childbirth, lactation, or related medical conditions, as well as recovery. Further, Harassment on the basis of sex includes harassment based on termination of pregnancy. For example, a pregnant student has trouble sitting at a classroom table and their professor makes fun of them and calls attention to their physical condition in an embarrassing or demeaning manner.

17. **What are examples of pregnancy-related conditions?**

    Pregnancy-related fatigue, dehydration (or the need for increased water intake), nausea (or morning sickness), increased body temperature, anemia, and bladder dysfunction; gestational diabetes; preeclampsia; hyperemesis gravidarum (i.e., severe nausea and vomiting); pregnancy-induced hypertension (high blood pressure); infertility; recovery from childbirth, miscarriage, or pregnancy termination; ectopic pregnancy; prenatal or postpartum depression; and lactation conditions such as swelling or leaking of breast tissue or mastitis.

18. **What is the responsibility of any UC employee if a student discloses to them that they are pregnant or have a pregnancy-related condition?**

    When any employee is notified by a student (or person with the legal right to act on their behalf) of a student's pregnancy or related condition, unless the employee reasonably believes that the campus Title IX Officer has been notified (for example, the student tells their professor they met with the Title IX Officer already), the employee must provide that person with: 1) the Title IX Officer's contact information; and 2) explain the Title IX Officer's role to coordinate specific actions to prevent sex discrimination (including pregnancy and related conditions) and ensure the student's equal access to the University's programs and activities. Though the Local Implementation Officer (LIO) is responsible for implementation of this Policy, the Title IX Officer, who may also act as the LIO, ultimately has responsibility for ensuring compliance with UC's Sexual Violence and Sexual Harassment Policy.
    
    For example:
    1. If a professor overhears a student telling other students they are pregnant, does the professor need to provide the Title IX Officer contact information and explain their role? No.
    2. If a student directly tells a professor that they are pregnant, does the professor need to provide the student with the Title IX Officer's contact information and explain their role? Yes.

19. **I am a student with a healthy pregnancy. Am I protected from Prohibited Conduct under this Policy and, if so, based on disability or sex?**

    Sex. However, please check the local processes at your campus. While the Title IX Officer has an obligation to facilitate reasonable modifications for you based on your pregnancy and any pregnancy-related conditions, they may delegate that responsibility to another University partner who is best positioned to facilitate those services for you. If you have any questions, contact your campus Title IX Officer for assistance. Moreover, if you have complications during your pregnancy, you may also qualify for support services as a student with a disability. For questions about those services, please contact your campus Disability Services office.

20. **What are examples of common reasonable modifications for students who are pregnant or who have related conditions?**

    Breaks during class to express breast milk, breastfeed, or attend to health needs associated with pregnancy or related conditions, including eating, drinking, or using the restroom; intermittent absences to attend medical appointments; changes in schedule or course sequence; extensions of time for coursework and rescheduling tests/exams; allowing a student to sit or stand or to carry or keep water nearby; counseling; changes in physical space or supplies (e.g., access to larger desk or footrest); and elevator access.
    
    Note: A modification that would fundamentally alter the nature of a University program or activity is not a reasonable modification.

21. **If I am a pregnant student with a healthy pregnancy, what type of documentation must I produce to receive reasonable modifications?**

    The Title IX Officer or their designee will only request documentation that is necessary and reasonable to determine the appropriate reasonable modifications, which information will be safeguarded consistent with applicable privacy laws; further, they will consult you in the process and make an individualized determination. Circumstances where the need is obvious and documentation would not be required include the need for a bigger uniform; where the student previously provided supporting documentation; where the student indicates they are pregnant and asks for the following during class: to carry or keep water nearby and drink it, use of a bigger desk, ability to sit or stand, or take breaks to eat, drink, or use the restroom; lactation needs; and accommodations available to students for reasons other than pregnancy without requiring supporting documentation.

22. **I am an employee who is pregnant or has pregnancy-related conditions. Am I protected from Prohibited Conduct under this Policy?**

    Discrimination, Harassment, and Retaliation against employees based on pregnancy, childbirth, lactation, and other related medical conditions is prohibited under this Policy. The University will also provide reasonable accommodations for a qualified employee's known limitations related to, affected by, or arising out of pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical condition unless the accommodation would cause an undue hardship. Employees should contact their campus disability management team for additional information.

23. **Are there any requirements for a space to qualify as a lactation space?**

    Yes. A lactation space must: not be a bathroom; be safe, clean and free from hazardous materials; be shielded from view and have a locking door; be free from intrusion from others; contain a surface to place a breast pump and personal items; contain a place to sit and have access to electricity; and have access to a sink with running water. The lactation space also must be functional, appropriate, and safe for use. Medical documentation is not required to request access to a lactation space.

## VIII. REVISION HISTORY

October 28, 2024: Technical update - adding contact list of Local Implementation Officers  
August 29, 2024: Technical updates and addition of new FAQs (12-23).  
February 20, 2024: This is the first issuance of this policy.

Although this is the first issuance of this Policy, the University has addressed discrimination, harassment, and retaliation in sections of other University policies. This Policy consolidates these sections into a comprehensive Policy, regardless of an individual's affiliation with the University. Please see Section VI for more information on these related policies.

This Policy is also reformatted to meet Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0.

## IX. APPENDICES

### Appendix I: Applicable Complaint Resolution and Grievance Policies

**Academic Personnel:**
- Members of the Academic Senate: Senate Bylaw 335
- Non-Senate Academic Appointees: APM - 140
- Exclusively Represented Academic Appointees: Bargaining Units & Contracts

**Students:**
- Policies Applying to Campus Activities, Organizations and Students, Section 110.00

**Staff Personnel:**
- Complaint Resolution (Senior Managers): PPSM II-70
- Complaint Resolution (Staff Personnel): PPSM 70
- Exclusively Represented Staff Personnel: Bargaining Units & Contracts
- Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Employees: Employee Complaint Resolution

**All members of the University community:**
- The University of California Policy on Reporting and Investigating Allegations of Suspected Improper Governmental Activities (Whistleblower Policy) protects the reporting and investigation of violations of state or federal laws or regulations.

**All University employees and applicants for employment:**
- The University's Whistleblower Protection Policy provides a complaint resolution process for employees and applicants for employment who have been subjected to retaliation as a result of having made a protected disclosure under the Whistleblower Policy or refused to obey an illegal order.

### Appendix II: Supportive and Remedial Measures

In determining Supportive Measures, the Local Implementation Officer will tailor the measures to the circumstances of each case, minimize burdens on the parties, and avoid depriving the parties of educational and employment opportunities as much as practicable. Supportive Measures are non-disciplinary and non-punitive and should not unreasonably burden a party.

When determining Supportive and/or Remedial Measures (as defined in Section II.B.8), the Local Implementation Officer will assess how much the University can protect the parties' privacy while also ensuring the Measures are effective. The Local Implementation Officer will explain to the parties any limits on protecting their privacy. Supportive and Remedial Measures must also be consistent with the parties' First Amendment rights.

The Local Implementation Officer may issue a no-contact order as a Supportive or Remedial Measure, but only where less restrictive measures would be insufficient to protect the safety of the Complainant or the University's environment.

In addition to Supportive and Remedial measures, the Local Implementation Officer may take other actions in accordance with existing policies and procedures to stop reported conduct, prevent its escalation or recurrence, and address its effects.

While not required, the Local Implementation Officer, within their sole discretion and in consultation with other offices as appropriate, may provide Supportive and Remedial Measures including, but not limited to:

**A. Campus Services Generally:**
Academic, employment, and other support including academic tutoring, counseling, disability services, health and mental health services, housing assistance, legal assistance, referral to employee assistance program, and information about the right to report a crime to campus or local law enforcement.

**B. Measures that May Be Available to Employees, Including Faculty, Academic Appointees, Staff, and Student Employees:**
Change to a different workstation, schedule, work location, unit, department, or position for which the employee is qualified provided that, in the case of a Complainant, the change is voluntary and equitable.

**C. Training and Education of the Respondent:**
The Respondent may be required to undergo training and/or periodic refresher classes.

**D. Campus Services Modified:**
1. If a campus service is not generally available or a fee is imposed, access may be arranged, or fees waived when appropriate.
2. Comprehensive services including additional medical, counseling, and academic support services.
3. Any other accommodations or Interim Measures that are reasonably available once a Complainant has requested them.

**E. Additional Educational Measures for Students:**
1. Change advisors, composition of dissertation committee, class sections and similar schedule adjustments.
2. Arrange extra time to complete academic requirements of a class or program, or to retake a class or withdraw from a class, without an academic or financial penalty if the University delayed such accommodations after it reasonably should have known of the violation.

**F. Other Measures Devised by the Local Implementation Officer or Other Administrator.**