ucladivest
 
During March 19-21, students and community from four UC campuses carried out a 3 day sit-in to demand the UC regents divest from war and the genocide of Palestinians.

During these 3 days, UC Divest shut it down through various actions such as propping up Tent City, students camping out near Luskin Conference Center, making our presence inescapable to the Regents and showcasing a reminder of the disparate conditions many Palestinian refugees face due to ongoing genocide.

Although our sit-in was originally set to be in the Luskin Conference Center hotel lobby, peaceful protestors were met with extreme aggravation and violence, 5 police departments showing up to the scene with over 100 police officers in SWAT Gear, and issuing an order for protestors to vacate the premises. They were told they could only be in a “Freedom of Expression Zone” outside on the street. Tent City was instead propped there and in the open air to demonstrate the impacts of the Regent’s harmful investments.

On Day 2, UC Divest joined the picket line for AFSCME 3299, the labor union for UC workers, in demanding that the Regents divest from Blackstone, a main driver in the housing crisis, and reinvest in livable wages for workers. On that same day, UC Divest demanded the Regents to not pass J1, a repressive policy aiming to prevent students or faculty from supporting Palestinian liberation by disallowing them from issuing personal statements on university websites. Protestors successfully shut down the J1 open session, tabling it to May.

On Day 3, we disrupted the Investment Committee meeting open session and demanded that the UC Regents divest from war profiteering and funding Palestinian genocide. Through this, protestors were able to secure an in-person meeting and negotiate with the Chief Investment Officer, Jagdeep Singh Bacher.

The students and workers of the UC demands that the UC ends its complicity in the Palestinian genocide and will not rest until full divestment! UC Divest will be back to demand that the J1 policy not be passed during the Regents meeting May 14-16 at UC Merced!